---
title: Parable of the Sower
author: Octavia E. Butler
read_start: 2025-01-12
read_end: 2025-01-21
goodreads_url: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show/7210576474
date: 2025-01-22
---

This book, written in 1993, presents a dystopian future through the journal entries of Lauren Olamina, spanning from July 2024 to October 2027. Lauren, our main protagonist, is fifteen years old at the start & eighteen by the end. She lives in a gated community in Robledo, California, shielded from the destruction & human despair that exist outside its protected walls. It's unclear to me what apocalyptic event triggered this dystopia — climate change? rising inequality? — as many remnants of "regular" American society still exist in some form: there is a newly elected president, somewhat functioning cities & companies, & police forces, albeit unreliable & corrupt, often robbing people under the guise of a “service fee.” These details suggest a society in rapid decline rather than complete collapse.

Eventually, the gated community is attacked & ravaged by outsiders, forcing Lauren & a ragtag group of survivors to travel north in search of a better chance at survival. Along the way, they integrate others into their group, & Lauren begins sharing her pseudo-religious philosophy called _Earthseed_. In short, Earthseed is a belief system derived from Lauren's observations growing up in a religious household — her father was the community's pastor — & noting the shortcomings of conventional notions of God. In Earthseed, the only lasting truth about the universe is _change_, leading to the central tenet: "God is change", & humanity has a responsibility to "shape God" to better themselves. The story ends after a tumultuous journey to northern California where the group decides to start the first Earthseed community, _Acorn_, after settling on land owned by Bankole, an older doctor who joins the group & begins a (questionable) relationship with Lauren.

With that rough summary out the way, I can say I enjoyed reading this, even if I have some reservations. I liked the structure of the book, told entirely through journal entries spaced anywhere from a few days to several months apart. This non-continuous sequencing created some compelling mood shifts when major events occured; the death of Lauren's younger half-brother Keith & the disappearance of her father were particularly gripping. Octavia Butler did a fantastic job building a world that felt eerily not too different from our own. The fact that the story begins near Los Angeles & involves devastating fires is, to say the least, unsettling given recent events. While not all characters are fully fleshed out, none felt too flat, & there's a healthy mix of personalities throughout — from Lauren's home community to the diverse group that bands together on the journey north.

I kind of wish I hadn't known Octavia Butler was a science fiction writer before reading this because I went in expecting a science fiction story — but it's not. That's on me & it's fine. However, there were a few other things I wasn't in love with. First, Lauren's ideation around Earthseed sometimes felt contrived, seemingly existing just to have a narrative arc to tie the story together. As presented, it didn't make me a believer, so it was frustrating to see Lauren's travel group start believing & trusting an eighteen year old's pseudo-religious vision for how communities should survive in this world. And don't get me started on the uncomfortable relationship between Lauren & Bankole, who was somewhere in his late fifties — eek. Lauren as a character sometimes feels like what an older person's idea of what a "smart" teenager would be. Butler was in her mid-forties when she wrote this, so I guess that checks out.

All in all, these few criticisms didn't ruin the story for me. I liked it. I enjoyed the first half a bit more than the second, so we'll see if I read the next & last book in the series. I'd rate this a 7-7.5/10, which rounds up to 4 ⭐.
